

What does it mean to be human in the 21st century!  Jonathan Pietsch
Why not start at the conclusion, get to the point, arrive at the end of the journey?   Below is some free form prose that describes my inner turmoil and peace. It is my summary of completing my A to Z on what it means to be human now, in 2020.  

Discombobulated at the edges,
Fashioned and shaped by worlds before and by the immediate world around me,
Craving connection, convenience and comfort,
Yet driven by purpose at times beyond my control.

Observing and a part of our amazing feats and crippling atrocities, 
Competitive, collaborative and not alone, a man in a women’s world,
Finding power and place in a tribalism that gives me a sense of being right/wrong,
Almost able to understand paradox extreme,
Where existence can be meaningless yet full of inventiveness and love. 

Living with a restlessness linked to curiosity,
Unable to know, but knowing more,
Predominantly anxious but fleetingly and more often experiencing joy, gratitude and happiness, 
Now part of a global information age with tensions, promise and challengers aplenty,
In my 60’s needing to find my place yet again!

The core reasons for compiling my thoughts about what it means to be human include; being a part of a step family that values meaning, reflection on what has brought me to a post Christian world view so that my partner and immediate family understand my inner spirit. Needing to also understand what my role is now and what are the  immediate challenges ahead for our human species and how I can continue to contribute.   
Historically, the perception of ourselves across the millennia have largely shaped what we are capable of. Hence contextualising the understanding of our humanity is a key task in assessing and addressing our current and future contributions. The age of enlightment has certainly shifted thinking from being a part of creation to actually being the creator.  So I have developed my A to Z that comprises books, films, songs and experiences to define what it means to be human right now.   
The many topics cover: Ageing Well, Born Bad, (Guns, germs and steel),  Escapism,  Failure, Paradox, The Century of the Self, Joy, Karen, Meaning, Numbers and data, Sapiens, Purpose, Globalisation, Status anxiety,  Timefulness,  Mens group, Interdependence,  Inhumanity, Righteousness and finally being Zucked. 
A Again, why not start with the end in mind with a focus on Ageing Well. When working in the Age care sector I was introduced to the work of George Valiant who as an Anthropologist was a part of the longest prospective studies (following people in real time), like the 7 up series but with increased numbers. I engaged with George and led a tour here in Melbourne when George was about to turn 80.  In his book by the very name “Ageing Well” he highlights some real wisdom that many of us have discovered intuitively. Much is about our attitude, having a sense of gratitude, an openness to meeting new people, the ability to reinvent oneself, preparedness to forgive rather than harbor resentments. The ability to be inquisitive and seek lifelong learning and then be generative (pass on wisdom). These  were some of the key factors/characteristics that lead to ageing well.  The importance of an inquisitive nature seems to be central to assisting people to understand what it means to be human. So that is a good place to start. 
B Born Bad- Are we or aren’t we? In my earlier years the predominant notion of being born bad and needing a Heavenly Father was central to my upbringing. Joyce explores this notion and particularly highlights Luther as a proponent of humans being born bad and needing a grace filled God.  Hence Lutheran’s feel like they have the gospel truth when it comes to Grace. But as I grew up and apart I needed to reinvent this view and adjust my self-esteem and sense of self-worth in a way that enabled me to know that I could make a meaningful contribution, just because I am. 
C. Carrie Bailee – Flying on Broken Wings 2014 is a real-life story that is not for the faint hearted. It further explores the worst and best in Human nature and reminds us that humans (and often close family are capable of what many see as evil deeds). To call them evil in my view lets them off, as if they have been under the influence of some otherness. No, sadly these are the choices that are in front of many of us.  Carrie is a refugee from Canada to Australia and defies her upbringing to be an amazing example of resilience and courage. 
D. Jarred Diamond- Guns Germs and Steel. Diamond begins with Yali from New Guinea asking the question “Why is it that you white people developed so much cargo [i.e., steel tools and other products of civilization] but we black people had little cargo of our own?”  This begins Diamonds historical search beginning 11000 years ago. He explores different cultures and how they ranged from the most populous communities to hunter gatherer communities with an emphasis on all communities developing levels of intelligence that adapt to their environments. None better than others, just different.   
E. Escapism seems to be an important part of being human. Those activities that are our go to when we need to renew ourselves and/or just have time out. In my early studies the work by Csikszentmihahalyi highlighted the importance of matching our skills with the challenge, it is in this way that we find a flow state. An experience where time can fly. The choice of our escapisms is also important as we have to be careful of too much or too little.   Finding the challenges also ensures that at times they may be difficult and stressful. That the experience of tension (in-between/not quite there) is a part of achieving the escapism and mastery over time.    
 F. Failure is an integral part of the human experience, it may be accompanied by shame as a first year primary school student not quite getting home before I needed to go to the toilet. Then the experience of generational shame of mum and dad being German, through to a marriage that I was unable to maintain. Th importance of vulnerability and being able to wear it seems to be a solely human trait. It seems one thing that you get better at as you grow older. Brene Brown as a social worker has developed, a body of work that she completed on shame. Her TED talks are many and include: Brene Brown on the power of Vulnerability.

G. Gardner, Jostein. Sophies World. (1991)  If you  want a quick tour through the history of Western Philosophy, then this is it. Gardner has the capacity to simplify some of the most complex ideas. He takes us as a child through the ideas of Plato, Aristotle, Hellenism (Stoics, Epicureans and the Cynics). Then we are taken through the middle ages and the renaissance to the enlightenment with Descartes and Spinoza, then the Romantics and then a few modern day philosophers. All the way he non judgementally takes us through these passages of time expounding some of the key thoughts in philosophy that covered the importance of the individual as opposed to the collective. The greatest value at the time of reading was simply the recognition of different and often opposing thought and its evolution over time. It inspired me to question everything and fancifully to consider that maybe meaning was created not given. 
H. Hamilton, Clive. The Freedom Paradox (2011) The idea of paradox (a logical statement that contradicts itself) has become more and more attractive to my understanding of human nature. Many of us prefer to build logical statements, one on top of the other. Often creating an either/or approach. To be one or the other. This often leads us to hold up a perceived truth that we then look for evidence to support. I was attracted to the title of this book as it emphasises a critical value that many (not all) societies seek. Freedom of the individual and freedom of political thought. Hamilton asserts that we cannot be truly free unless we commit ourselves to a moral life. 
Me, myself and I. I, Me and Myself, isn’t that what this life is all about. Now we have the me generation and the me culture, the selfie. A Facebook page that promotes our better selves and seeks to attain a level of status relative to our peers. Then this focus on the self-shifts to popular culture which seems to be all about what we can consume. This includes physical things as well as the consumption of experiences. The Century of the Self is a 2002 British television documentary series by filmmaker Adam Curtis. It focuses on the work of psychoanalysts Sigmund Freud and Anna Freud, and PR consultant Edward Bernays. In episode one, Curtis says, "This series is about how those in power have used Freud's theories to try and control the dangerous crowd in an age of mass democracy." Episodes include "Happiness Machines", "The Engineering of Consent", "There is a Policeman Inside All Our Heads; He Must Be Destroyed", "Eight People Sipping Wine in Kettering" 
Bernays masterfully links mass produced goods to the internal desires that all humans have. The series focuses on the discovery of Freuds ideas that have been used in marketing approaches to manage the collective behaviour of the masses. See a copy of a version of the Century of the Self
J. Joy and the art of understanding it. The Cat Empire as a band I discovered before they became really famous. It was in the Spiegle tent outside the National Art Gallery in Victoria, I think in the early naughties. The song that has the ability to bring tears to my eyes (nearly every time I listen to it), wonder and joy in being alive is called Misere.  Ironically, it’s original version (name) comes from a Chorus that emphasises “Have mercy on me Oh God” however the words from the Cat empire emphasise already being in the promised land and long live living if living can be this. The key focus is on the simple joy of being alive, just because.
K. Karen! For the past 10 years I have been fortunate enough to be in a very loving, interesting, caring and at times challenging relationship. We got married on my 60th birthday and made a good celebration into a great one. Being a part of Karen’s life has meant that I have needed to revisit my past and my Lutheran history. Karen often introduces herself as having a big Lutheran stamp on her bum. For her this highlights her history, personal and family as she was immersed in the church well before day dot.  One of the things that has made it easy to be together has been our shared history and culture as there has been no need to second guess, like with partners that we both previously had (from other distinct cultures). However, we also have many differences in views and beliefs that at times cause consternation on both our parts. A common thread for us both has been our lived compassion for the more disadvantaged in the community with work experience taking us into fields that others see as lost causes. This certainly is part of our cultures that have a strong Christian flavour. Karen has also introduced me to Franciscan Friar Richard Rohr based in New Mexico. Rohr writes about his and generally the human experience in a way that has a deep understanding of what it is to be human. 
List.  Schindlers List. 1100 people saved through the actions of one man. All because they were on the List. Schindler as a businessman, welcomed war as an opportunity to make money. But in time he deftly managed an appalling situation that unfolded in front of his eyes. The extermination of a race of people regarded as subhuman. As a member of the Nazi party he worked subtly and tirelessly to save the lives of those whom he knew who worked in his factory. At the end of the movie Schindler pleads with himself, that he could have done more. Over a thousand Jews saying their farewell are voiceless and silent in their appreciation of his actions that have saved their lives. Not having the words to thank him, but so mindful that they have a second chance at life, because of the actions of this recalcitrant member of the Nazi party. 
Meaning. What is it actually?  Meaning is created by “Information from different sensory inputs — vision, hearing, touch — then gets put together to form an overall interpretation of what’s happening and how it’s meaningful to us.” The author highlights that definition might sound remote from questions like, “How do I make my life meaningful?” But the science does line up with the self-help books on this score. The gurus say that if you can find some alignment in your past, present and future selves (integrating information over time) you’ll feel your life has meaning. They also tell you it’s very important to be socially connected rather than isolated. Translation: share information and cooperate with others. Be interdependent.  Therefore: right now, I write for meaning that connects my past, present and future and I am interested in sharing with others and cooperating to discover further meaning. That is my meaning as I currently understand it.  See link The Conversation- Meaning - Science can help
N.  Numbers and data. The world seems to be in a sorry mess and we seemed to be wired to listen to all the negative press stories.  Hans Roslings book called Factfulness (2018) addresses this issue in a powerful way, highlighting how Human society has achieved many remarkable social achievements in the past 50 to 100 years. A few examples are:
	•	Worldwide 80% of girls are now attending and completing primary school.
	•	In the past 20 years the proportion of people living in extreme poverty has more than halved.
	•	That the world population is not growing exponentially and is likely to peak at 11 million with most people aged between 18 and 74.
Despite these achievements based on Roslings testing, people respond by saying that the world is more frightening, more violent, the reality is that most things use to be worse. 
As a possibilist Rosling suggests:
	•	That we keep two thoughts in our head. Better and Bad. That things are better and that some things are still bad. (Hence, we are still motivated to improve.
	•	That we need to thank our societies (and all that have gone before us) in making such amazing progress over the past two centuries.  
That we teach children humility and enable curiosity.  Humility in the sense that we do not always know and may need to change our mind and direction. Curiosity, because we want them to be open to new information and discovering new things. 

Of Humankind - Sapiens – A brief History of Humankind- by Yuval Noah Harari (2018)
This is a big picture exploration of the creation and development of the Homo Sapiens species that has so dominated the development of our world over the last 50,000 years and specifically the last 10,000 years. Yuval highlights gossiping as a key skill developed by Sapiens to defeat the Neanderthals. A fascinating section on the Sapiens is about our need to create Empires that aim to share and dominate the culture of others. He describes the many that have come and gone. He highlights how nearly all current cultures have evolved to be aggressive and dominant and hence the ongoing wars are a clear expression of whom we have become.  He highlights the way males have dominated most cultures and the recent uprising of women is a phenomenon that we have never seen before. He also highlights the insight of religions shifting from a poly god focus to a more mono god focus over time. But I think his most critical observation is Sapiens discovery of ignorance. That the age of enlightenment is characterised by not knowing. That by recognising that we know so little (rather than have a defined meaning/religion/pathway to life) that this has liberated us to ask questions and to seek solutions that may in themselves only be temporary. Overall his realistic appraisal of human nature and its evolution should assist us to be at least a little predictive about our future, however recognising that each new discovery may just lead us elsewhere and to places unknown.
Purpose 
Victor Frankl, from his book entitled Mans Search for Meaning (1946)
1500 people couped up in a shed built to accommodate 200 at best, was the beginning of 3 years as a war prisoner for Frankl. Amazingly Frankl survived, a psychoanalyst who carried his manuscript with him (then lost it) and he, through being so focused on purpose and meaning to rewrite his manuscript survived the horrors of the holocaust. Having a sense of purpose (whatever that may be is central to his thinking.)  Some of his classic sayings included in his new therapy called logo therapy were: We should all live as if this is our second life. With a focus on how we can manage suffering and that suffering may be ultimately good for our personal growth. That there is an ultimate purpose, but we just don’t know what it is. Humour is one of the soul’s weapons in its fight for self-preservation. Personal responsibility and a person having the capacity to choose within his life opportunities is central to Frankl’s view. It is exemplified in the attitude of do not ask life what it can do for you but what can you do with life’s expectations of you.  Frankl’s story exemplifies again the best and worst of what humans are capable of.  
Q. For the life of me I have been unable to come up with something for Q, apart from the Questions and more questions that this all raises. See the section about ongoing questions at the end of this paper. 
Revisited - Globalisation and its discontents by Joseph E Stiglitz (2017)
The phenomena of Globalisation has been occurring since homo sapiens began moving out of Africa and in a sense we are now rediscovering ourselves all over the globe. In relation to the question of what does it mean to be human and or how do we understand human nature, the increased speed of globalisation is clearly having an impact on who we are and who we are becoming and evolving into. The inevitability and now speed of globalisation provides an understanding of human nature (humans inventiveness, inquisitiveness and amazing ability to survive in extreme environments) as well as highlights the phenomena of a world becoming smaller and that all of us are in much closer proximity to one another. This means that we get to look at ourselves and how we have developed into many communities with over 6000 languages. The landscape has often marked these communities creating many cultural differences. Recent travels to South America and South Africa has born witness to this. We are now confronted with many differences of expression of being human to influencing one another to potentially be more the same.   Which of the dominant cultures will win out in this global war of influence. 
The question must be raised, has globalisation simply allowed the dominant cultures to exploit, takeover and control populations in what have appeared to be relatively peaceful times? Is Globalisation speedily influencing and changing the human experience for us to be more the same with much less difference? Our natures are clearly changing and the answer to the question of “what does it mean to be human?” requires a different answer from what we were yesterday to what we will be even in the near future. But Stiglitz insists that globalisation if harnessed can be managed in a way that benefits most citizens in developing and developed countries.
Status Anxiety by Alain De Botton
De Botton’s highlights here an almost universal anxiety that rarely gets mentioned directly: an anxiety about what others think of us; about whether we’re judged a success or a failure, a winner or a loser. We care about our status for a simple reason: because most people tend to be nice to us according to the amount of status we have (it is no coincidence that the first question we tend to be asked by new acquaintances is ‘ What do you do?’). With the help of philosophers, artists and writers, the book examines the origins of status anxiety (ranging from the consequences of the French Revolution to our secret dismay at the success of our friends). He then reveals ingenious ways in which people have learnt to overcome their worries in their search for happiness.
Timefulness by Marcia Bjornerud 2018
Timefulness as an expression has been used by the author purposefully in contrast to mindfulness. She highlights as a geologist just where humans fit, in relation to the time scales of the evolution of life and particularly our planet with its 4.5 billion years. The time scales are mind boggling (just counting to a million can take ten days and then a billion is 1000 million) and our place in the world can be more appropriately seen from this perspective.  This highlights just how small we are and particularly for me highlighted just how tiny are the problems and issues that keep me awake at night. This sense of awe can be completely inspiring and certainly humbling about our place in the world. It gives me a new found reverence for the value and fragility of the life that somehow we have been given the opportunity to have. This for me seems to connect with a deep sense of being a part of the fabric of this experience that we call life. As a geologist she takes us through the critical time periods that include multiple catastrophic changes, through other passages of time that are slow and incremental by nature.  Our many methods that create the basis for this understanding are carefully explained. She also highlights and emphasises that now with 7.5 billion humans on the Earth that we are now collectively having a significant impact on the physical world. She argues that with a geologist’s mind we need to consider timefulness and use our knowledge to create a sustainable world. The paradox of our smallness and our collective size with its impact on man induced climate change, must challenge us as individuals and as a community. Recognising that the present is just a link to the past and future, reminds us that maybe our key purpose in this life is to be good ancestors.
U You, me and men’s group. 
Much of who we are is only reflected and makes sense depending on who we spend time with. The notion of “the other” is a big theme in psychology today and some assert that it is only “the other” that really helps us to make sense of whom we are. Now for nearly 30 years, half of my life I have been hanging around a group of guys who meet on a regular basis. Every four to six weeks with a weekend away every year. The bond between has grown over time and initially I thought that a few meetings would do me. Sharing a bit about myself and getting to understand a few other blokes. They were a bit “Girley” for me and possibly a bit too much like myself. But it’s stuck and we have gone through so many life stage experiences that our bond is strong and our friendships will be for life. However, one bailed on us and took his leave far too early, but Ray led us on a journey that was entwined with his life and death.  This experience was quite surreal in itself and I’m sure taught us many lessons about dying well. His death was an inclusive one that had no fear.   
Generally for the Men’s group, it has been quite startling how we have been able to share like experiences, based on divorces, children growing up, parents dying, birthday experiences in our 40’s, 50’s and now 60’s. We also love to laugh, at each other and more often at ourselves. 
Vanier Jean, Becoming Human
 Becoming Human is an interesting title in itself. It’s as if we are trying to be something other. That to be human is not enough or that we have been running away from it. ‘Being human’ is another title that we often hear. Contextually for Vanier this struggle exists within a societal and local community expectations to be successful and to make positive contributions. Our Western society with its powerful religious influence encourages us to be better than human. (God Like). Jean Vanier the Canadian, Philosopher, Theologian and Humanitarian highlights in his book on “what does it mean for him to become human?” The critical focus for Vanier has been on the importance of being part of a community. Vanier began his L’Arche communities in France and now there are 134 communities in 35 countries. It was in his first experience of living with people with an intellectual disability that he came face to face with his own weaknesses and vulnerabilities. That he did not need to pretend that he was strong or clever, but that he was like everyone else with frailties as well as gifts. Our cultural focus on competition (being the best or even our best) so often estranges us from others that we never really meet people. Here is another paradox of the value of competition and what it brings, but that it must live alongside compassion and acceptance and the recognition of diversity and the need to be inclusive.  
Women’s Inhumanity to woman by Phyllis Chesler
Being a part of this very large caring profession has also highlighted that Woman have a fascinating way of relating one to the other. In my Organisational Dynamics study and work I came across this book by Chesler. Chesler was reluctant to draw attention to this dynamic, however felt that it was important enough to write about so that the core issues could be addressed over time.  She emphasises that like for men, women seek status, a place and that obvious hierarchies exist that are based on beauty, smartness and age. The associated emotions that exist in all hierarchies such as jealousy and envy can result in bitter rivalry to access what is often the associated power or status given to the winners.  Our animal roots are never far away as we all aim to survive and mate in a way that relates often to our unconscious desires. Chesler describes the complicated relationships that women have with women across cultures and that most women have with their mothers. Chesler is a vibrant feminist but also highlights studies where women can be just as sexist as men, often unwittingly supporting the structural contexts that give men power. The book opens an important topic for women and men. It also, like many other issues opens the problem up with a view to considering ways to address and to create a more empathic and civilised approach, that in the long run addresses very deep seated problems. I believe that it’s an important read for women and men alike.
What is the x factor?   
You often hear that some people have the x factor, a gift that makes them incredibly human.  Mandela comes to mind, the Delai Lama and Ghandi. Individuals that seem to know their own minds, have humility (after a number of years) in spades and seemingly display a level of contentedness that the rest of us just don’t have.
Why good people are divided by politics and religion. The Righteous Mind by Jonathan Haidt (2012)
Haidt is a social and cultural psychologist and based on his work in neuroscience, genetics and evolutionary modelling he highlights that his key take home message is that we are all self righteous hypocrites. We generally find the evidence that supports our position that confirms our tribes thinking. One of Haidt’s early principles is that Plato is wrong and that Hume is right. Plato believed that reasoning should control the passions and that Hume emphasised that reason is a servant to our passions. Haidt is firmly in Hume’s camp and further develops the notion of Intuition.   That intuition is developed firstly from not wanting to be harmed or to harm. Then he argues that morality is developed through five core values. These are: caring, fairness, loyalty, authority and sanctity. 
Through reference to other research and a variety of his own human experiments he highlights that we: 
1. Are obsessively concerned about what others think of us. 
2. Consciously use reason to justifying and support our actions
3. In moral and political matters are groupish rather than selfish
4. Have a dual nature and have an extraordinary ability to care about things beyond ourselves. 
Haidt goes on to argue that the left (wing) holds the two values of caring and fairness as distinct from loyalty, authority and sanctity. That the right taps into and recognises that people make intuitive moral choices based on all five guideposts. He then suggests that conservative politicians have more ways to connect with voters through the values of loyalty, authority and sanctity. 
Haidt opens up a conversation about psychology and politics. He invites us to step outside of our systems (matrixes 2 to 5 values) left and right to help us understand each other’s position and their justifications. 
The key insight from this work is that our minds are designed for groupish righteousness, that we all think we are right.   Stepping into others shoes seems to be more important than ever as there is a great divide appearing on so many issues with minimal effort from either side enabling a conversation rather than an argument. Let’s disagree more constructively recognising that our moral leanings have many influences. 
Zucked by Roger McNamee 2019
Waking up to the Facebook catastrophe is the subtitle for this book and highlights just how we have shifted into the information age. With 2.2 billion users, most see Facebook as a global success connecting families, friends, communities of interest and advertisers. McNamee was a close confidant of Mark Zuckerberg until recently, advising him at a range of levels.  Over the past 3 years he has taken a different perspective highlighting a range of concerns. These include how technology platforms can take advantage of you, how a monopoly can disregard individual rights and how the use of the best psychology can ensure users become addicted to the many functions of the tech platform. And Facebook is all for free – or is it?
The growth of the company is revered behind a motto of fail fast, then apologise and tell people that we will do better next time. Although agreements have been signed not to sell mega data, lots of data has been sold and the use of that data it is claimed and generally agreed has had an impact on the US election that Trump won and referendums like Brexit. Group behaviour on Facebook emerged in a shocking way in Myanmar where thousands of users used hate speech to further persecute the Rohingya in words and actions. 
The aim is to keep you on the app, using it as much as possible so that you can be influenced or be a part of a large data set that is sold to marketing companies. So, the best psychologists are used to build on basic human needs to be liked, and/or build on peoples fear of missing out. Other critical means include the recognition of humans need for status and to be slightly above where we should be along with feeding off our envious natures and hence driving patterns of behaviour where we are jealous of other’s experiences and/or purchases. McNamee says that we need to acknowledge that we are persuadable that now in our modern society we crave convenience, connection and things that are free. In summarising McNamee, is seriously concerned about the threat that Facebook continues to have to democracy, public health and poorer communities, to our privacy and ultimately to the rule of law. 
Conclusions
So, my A to Z begins with Ageing Well and is completed with being Zucked with considerable thought in between, some carefully chosen books and other random by nature, and still with a few gaps.  Recording each book’s core thoughts has been the easy part (however being succinct can take away from the many complex thoughts and messages) as has relating my own personal experience that is interwoven with my choice and my subjectivity. But I am pleased to report that it hasn’t been an exercise in confirming what I know as many of the newer texts have shifted my thinking into new spheres.   
I began thinking about the human condition (but this is from a deficit position), like it’s something that we suffer. Hence, I switched to considering human nature, this appears to take more of a neutral position that recognises that there may be considerable variations and possibilities when considered.  In addition to this, one of the premises of bringing some of my thinking together about defining human nature is to discover what it is to be human? To do this we need to take a big and small picture approach to this question. 
From a big picture perspective, we can see that expressions of being human vary wildly. We are now without a doubt the dominant species across the globe. We have developed into a species over 4.1 billion years that the earth has been in existence with a history of over 100,000 years as homo sapiens. We are now over 7 billion people with some 6000 languages from 195 countries. With so many differences as well as similarities. The world is now more connected than ever with even just one IT application (Facebook) bringing 2.2 billion people together. For all of us our contexts are different.  For some life meaning is prescribed, for others they are in a constant state of flux creating meaning. Is one better than the other?  Probably not, however those that continue to search for new meaning will not only unsettle themselves but probably others around them.  
 My experience tells me that the aboriginal communities on Elcho island (Visited in the 80’s -200 kms north east of Darwin) continue to live for the day, shaped by their 60,000 years of sustainable living, now rudely interrupted. Their understanding of what it means to be human varies considerably to my own. However, they are quickly colliding and need to as globalisation takes hold. Stiglitz highlights the positives and negatives of globalisation and a way forward that is being tested as we grapple with human induced climate change. 
From an individual personal level, we all battle with understanding and finding our place. This begins in our family, through kinder, primary and secondary school, into the workplace, then into the broader community.  Our place is also dependant on our choice of the size of the fishbowl we choose to live in. Status anxiety (De Botton) seems to be a common concern for many in the modern world, comparing ourselves constantly with others (Haidt) along with finding purpose (Frankl). This is conjoined with the life that we choose to lead (Pleasurable, Good or Meaningful- Seligman) and our own family origins and capabilities that have been bestowed to us.
So, when we consider the big and small pictures together I feel overwhelmed by the smallness of myself within the context of our history, years of development and now the population size of our species.      
I think that some of the common themes (about understanding human nature) from this set of readings/relationships and experiences are:  
	•	That homo sapiens are a dominant species and we are dominant because of our nimbleness, ability to communicate and that we exist mostly to dominate other cultures (build empires). (Harari)
	•	That subcultures have developed across the globe mostly fashioned by the landscape with many (primitive?) cultures misunderstood and possibly smarter than the colonising humans that have been focused on domination rather than sustainability. (Diamond)
	•	That we are capable of many amazing feats as well as crippling atrocities. (Caree Bailee)
	•	That to live in community is an essential part of our being, yet we want to be seen as unique as individuals as well as part of the community. (Vanier and Haidt)
	•	That over the past 100 years we have made many significant improvements as societies across the globe improving health and living conditions as well as potentially eliminating poverty. However, we seem to naturally focus on how things seem to be worse than before.  (Factfulness)
	•	That our survival as a species has taken some time to emerge and that competition and collaboration and conquering has led us to this critical juncture. That we as humans through our  ingenuity are now negatively affecting the climate through over resource usage. (Harari and Bjornerud)
	•	Men and women’s roles particularly in Western societies are being transformed and that we are  experiencing massive role changes that are challenging society structure. (Chesler)  
So, what does it mean to be human 
	•	We must recognise our genes and our inbreed need to be dominant (competitive) and right. (Harari and Haidt)
	•	That we live in the context that often life is difficult and painful for us and hence the need to have a variety of escapes. (Escapism)
	•	That the pursuit of attitudes that create compassion and inclusivity are required to address our dominant natures. (Vanier, Schindlers List)
	•	There must be a tension (positive) that living life provides and that this needs to be experienced every day. Hence the importance of understanding paradox and the nature of opposites. (Hamilton) Brian Cox the cosmologist highlights that we need to live a meaningful life in a meaningless Universe. That at one level we are insignificant (in the scheme of things) yet invaluable as a unique life source. 
	•	The recognition of the big picture and our small contributions emphasising our need to be “good ancestors”. (Bjornerud) It is no longer adequate to be just a good person (moral, considerate and contributing to society). That in the 21st century expectations have grown with a focus on the sustainability of our planet. 
	•	As the world seems to get smaller there is a need to be independent and interdependent at the same time. (Stiglitz).  
	•	We need to make moral choices that give shape to our expression of self to enjoy freedom. (Hamilton).
	•	Enlightened self-interest means that much of what we do does need self-interest however self-interest is best considered in the context of community and our moral choices. (Hamilton, Harari)
	•	That we are equipped with an array of emotions and they are there to be felt and experienced and choices made to express them and to act on them. (DeBotton)
	•	That we are easily influenced and crave convenience, connection and things that are free. (Zucked)
In reflections with others about “What it means to be human” considering that I am white, of European origin, male, a privileged baby boomer that has grown up in essentially a peace time period of history would strongly suggest that my experience may not be a generalisable one. In summary:
 “To be human for me is to have the capacity to think deeply and to laugh out loud. It means being free based on my moral choices that links me to purpose in a paradoxical world.  Being human is allied closely to an attitude of gratitude that enables me to love family and friends. To be human is to be curious and more often wrong than I am right. To be connected to the many feelings that help me to understand my place and my reality. Being Human in the 21st Century also recognises that I am not alone with millions of other vulnerable people in a fragile world.” 

The next step from understanding what it means to be human is to identify for ourselves and our broader communities what are the immediate challenges. There are many but based on my A to Z there are four that come to mind immediately. They are:
	•	Can we shift from being cultural predators to protectors of the earth. (Good ancestors)
	•	Deliberately managing our better and worse selves. Exploring the paradox and the tension of a meaningful life.  
	•	Creating a mindset that focuses on hopefulness rather than on a bleak future.
	•	How do we spend our time well and how can IT assist to us to do that?
